What does Charles Dickens want to tell us about Victorian society in Britain? His original plan was to produce a pamphlet to raise awareness of the poverty and appalling living conditions which existed in 19th century Britain. However, he decided that a short story about Christmas would actually reach more people and draw more attention to the inequalities which existed at this time. So, in 1843 his classic tale A Christmas Carol was born.

Dickens was concerned to highlight the stark division between the lives of rich and poor in the 1800s. He realised that society had undergone a huge upheaval with the coming of the Industrial Revolution. Many people now flocked from the countryside to the towns in search of work in the growing manufacturing industries. From around 1780 industrialists had begun to build much larger factories powered by the new coal-fired steam engines. Many of these factories made cloth, which was in demand all over the world. In this way, the Industrial Revolution created many jobs for the poor and made factory owners very rich at the same time. However, the workers and their families often lived in extreme poverty. In A Christmas Carol, Dickens portrays a typical wealthy man called Ebenezer Scrooge, who chooses to ignore the poverty and misery around him, including that of his own employee Bob Cratchit. We see the contrast between the Scrooge’s privileged but lonely existence in his large town house with its grand staircase, and the tiny four-roomed house in the suburbs occupied by the entire Cratchit family.

In the 19th century the population of cities grew rapidly. For example, in London between 1800 and 1900 the population grew from one million to six million. Many of the migrants from the countryside were now living in slums. These were areas of cheap, overcrowded housing, often without proper drainage or sewage systems. Several families frequently shared just one water tap and toilet and this led to disease, hunger and crime. Even children were exploited by heartless factory owners and forced to work long hours, often in dangerous conditions.

Many people in this period of British history believed that poverty among the poor was simply inevitable. For example, Thomas Malthus believed that the human population would always grow faster than the food supplies. Dickens, on the other hand, wanted to show us that there would be plenty of food to go round – but only if the rich were generous to the poor. We see this in chapter three when the Ghost of Christmas Present takes Scrooge in a dream to see the bustling shops where food is plentiful.

Malthus and other Victorians also held the opinion that helping the poor made them lazy and took away their motivation to work hard. So in 1834 a Poor Law was passed to minimise the help available to poor people. Families then had to enter the much-feared workhouses to receive food and shelter. The conditions were often atrocious and entering the workhouse brought a huge sense of shame to the family.

In addition, Victorian society was very religious. At this time, families were urged to spend their Sunday going to church, reading the bible and resting. This may have seemed appropriate to the middle and upper classes. However, Dickens was against this idea because it meant that poorer people had very few forms of enjoyment on their one day off, as everything was closed on Sunday. Usually poor households were not equipped with their own oven, so during the working week they had their food cooked at a local baker’s shop. However, on Sundays, these bakers had to close, meaning that many families were deprived of a hot meal. In the book we hear the Ghost of Christmas Present explaining this to Scrooge, who has no idea how families were affected.

Dickens wanted to highlight these conditions and the suffering of the poor due to his personal experiences as a child. Unfortunately his family, like many, went into debt and his father was sent to debtors’ prison. The young Dickens was then forced to sell his book collection and work in a rat-infested factory from the age of 12, instead of continuing his education. This experience made Dickens very critical of the way Victorian society treated its poorest people.
In A Christmas Carol, Scrooge comes to realise through his succession of dreams that many of his long-held beliefs about the poor were wrong. Through this series of revelations, Dickens depicts for the reader his own solutions to the problems he sees before him in Victorian society.

Firstly, Dickens drew attention to the selfishness of the rich who, like Scrooge, seemed to be only concerned with gaining more wealth. Dickens believed that the wealthy had a responsibility to help those less fortunate than themselves. Through his works, he promoted the importance of generosity and charity. He knew that from the kind deeds of the successful philanthropists of his time that it was possible to improve the lives of the poor. For example, the famous English chocolate makers, the Cadburys, tried to provide quality homes and better lifestyles for their workers at their factory in Bournville near Birmingham. Another businessman, Titus Salt, who was a cloth maker, also created better conditions for his workers at Saltaire in Yorkshire. In A Christmas Carol , Scrooge learns the importance of giving to charitable works and finally gives a large donation. He also begins to see that if workers were paid a fair wage, there would be less need for charity.

Secondly, Dickens believed that many of the problems of Victorian society (such as crime, poverty and disease) were mainly due to a lack of education. He supported projects to help educate the poor, such as the Ragged Schools movement which gave free education, clothing and food to children from poor families. In A Christmas Carol, Dickens’ portrayal of the young character called Ignorance highlights how those with no access to education are doomed to a life in the prisons and workhouses. Yet, he feels that with schooling the poor could gain self-respect and improve their own lives.

In terms of religious life, Dickens turned away from the strict moral code of the middle and upper class Victorians who placed emphasis on outer respectability. Instead, he believed that to be a good Christian, people should look for opportunities to do good deeds for others. He considered that we should try to be humble, charitable, faithful and forgiving like the Cratchit family. He also firmly believed that much happiness could be found this way.

It is no coincidence that Dickens chose to set the story at Christmastime. In Victorian society many traditions we associate with Christmas became increasingly important – for example cards, crackers, carols, decorations, gifts and Christmas dinner itself. Secular activities such as feasts and games were also becoming a central part of the festivities. In the novel we see both Fred and Fezziwig hosting Christmas parties which were full of fun, dancing, laughter and food. Yet is it is evident that Dickens views the most important part of the spirit of Christmas as the showing of charity, forgiveness, goodwill and generosity. His key message to both Victorian society and future generations is to observe these values all year round to build a fairer and happier society.

In Nineteen Eighty-Four Orwell uses a combination of the following themes to put across his predictions for a future society.

Firstly, he uses the dangers of totalitarianism to illustrate how the population can be controlled in order to sustain and increase the power of the state. In 1949 when Orwell was writing this work, the Cold War had not yet escalated, but Orwell was concerned that many intellectuals supported communism. He therefore strove to portray the perfect totalitarian society in Nineteen Eighty-Four - and to indicate by the title of the book that it could happen fairly soon. It was a warning that in just 35 years time, a version of a society like that described in the novel could materialise. Orwell describes a state where all aspects of human life are monitored and controlled. Even a feeling of disloyalty to the state is against the rules and will be punished. Through Winston's experiences the reader realises that the powers of the state are even more far-reaching than they can imagine.

Orwell also warns us how the individual can be overpowered by the state, through the twin themes of psychological manipulation and physical control. Through the ever-present telescreen the Party bombards the individual with its own messages and agenda, even claiming fictitious successes by false reporting of events. People quickly begin to lose the ability to think independently. In addition, the omnipresent signs reading 'BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU' create a climate of fear where people are afraid to follow their natural inclinations. Even family members are encouraged to spy on each other and report any perceived disloyalty to the state. Emotional ties are quickly broken; even physical desires are repressed and reduced to a process of mere procreation. Furthermore, the workforce is kept in a general state of exhaustion with long working days, compulsory 'Physical Jerks' sessions each morning and a daily ration of gin to dull the senses! Anyone not completely obedient to the rules is 're-educated', a euphemism for brutality and torture. Readers can see how physical pain easily breaks down even the most rebellious and confident soul, and this is played out through Julia and Winston's complete betrayal of each other. Furthermore, the modern-day reader is familiar with the concept of 're-education' which has recently been raised in connection with so-called 'training schools' in the Orient and elsewhere.

Orwell also illustrates how technology plays a part in bringing about the subservience of the population. Bearing in mind that Orwell's novel was conceived and written before the evolution of the computer, his prediction of technology which can record and control patterns of behaviour on a mass scale is visionary. The early readers of the book soon grasped how it would be possible for the authorities to use technology for evil means, rather than to enhance the life of the population. Today's reader is even more aware that, through our love affair with the mobile phone and social media we, as individuals, have independently surrendered our right to a private life and willingly agreed to carry devices which have the capability of monitoring and even predicting our actions. We have thoughtlessly succumbed to the influence of propaganda and persuasion in exchange for some of the luxuries and conveniences mobile technology has offered us. Perhaps we should be more aware of this vulnerability?

Orwell also explores the possibilities of using language itself as a means of mind control. By the continuous perfecting of Newspeak, the emerging official language of the state, we see that concepts which are against the power of the government will gradually be eliminated from the dictionary. Eventually, it will be impossible for an individual to think a single rebellious thought. The appropriate words will not exist. This is probably the most vital part of the authorities' plan. There are distinct parallels here with the controlling forces at work in colonialism over many past decades. Colonial masters introduced their own language as that of government and business - leading to a loss of culture and identity within the indigenous population.

Lastly, in Nineteen Eighty-Four the insidious government plan to control history and information works hand in hand with the previously-mentioned methods to reinforce whatever ideas the authorities seek to promote. Because there are no contradictory sources, the government version of any event cannot be challenged. Eventually, apathy born of exhaustion breaks down the individual's will to question the diet of false news he is being constantly fed. Though written in 1949, the novel seems to clearly predict the epidemic of 'fake news' we are encountering in the 21st century.

However, despite the effects of these methods of warning, the overwhelming of the world by a totalitarian state has not materialised as predicted. Democracy had to a large extent won through by the time the year 1984 arrived in real time. This was followed by the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989, leading to newfound freedom of movement for East German citizens, and then to the dismantling of the Soviet Union in the 1990s. Gorbachov's policy of 'glasnost' or 'openness' had led to an independent democratic movement towards greater freedom for the countries of Eastern Europe. However, in very recent years, with the rise of the right we are now seeing in many Western nations, we have entered an uncertain period where the stark warnings of Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four are still relevant, though the protagonists may have changed.

The Gunpowder Plot took place in England in the 17th century. It was a secret plan by a group of 13 Catholics, led by Robert Catesby, to kill the Protestant King James I. At this time, the Catholics in England were angry because under King James it was necessary to attend a Protestant church and not a Catholic church. If the Catholics did not change to a Protestant church, they received a punishment, such as a fine (money paid to the state) or sometimes imprisonment.

Some of Robert Catesby's group met for the first time at an English pub called the 'Duck and Drake' in London on 20th May 1604. They decided to organise an explosion to blow up (destroy) the House of Lords when King James came to open Parliament on 5th November 1605. In this way, they intended to kill both King James and his Government at the same time. One of the men was a man called Guy Fawkes.

Then in March 1605 they began to fill a cellar underneath the Houses of Parliament with many barrels of an explosive known as gunpowder. In total, there were 36 barrels of gunpowder. This was actually enough gunpowder to blow up the Houses of Parliament 25 times! The man who had the job of guarding the gunpowder until the Opening of Parliament on 5th November, was Guy Fawkes.

However, on 26th October 1605 someone wrote a warning letter to a gentleman called Lord Monteagle, telling him not to go to the Houses of Parliament on 5th November. Lord Monteagle showed the letter to other people and they made a search of the buildings. As a result, the authorities found and arrested Guy Fawkes in the cellar under the House of Lords. This was on the actual day he had planned to light the gunpowder, blow up the Houses of Parliament and kill the King. This very serious crime against the state was called 'high treason' and the punishment was death. The King's men immediately took Guy Fawkes and locked him in the Tower of London. He was put to death here on 31st January 1606.

So the King and the Houses of Parliament stayed safe! Afterwards, King James said that he wanted the people to celebrate this victory every year on 5th November. Therefore, on 'Bonfire Night' or 'Guy Fawkes' Night' it became the tradition all over Britain for families to have fireworks, light bonfires and burn a home-made figure dressed as Guy Fawkes. Today, we still have celebrations in every town and village around the date of 5th November. However, these days, for reasons of safety, most people go to large organised events. Here, the main attraction is watching colourful firework displays, as well as eating hotdogs and other treats.

To this day, special guards called the 'Yeomen of the Guard' still search under the Houses of Parliament before the King or Queen arrives for the yearly State Opening of Parliament. This is to make sure there is never a repeat of the Gunpowder Plot.